Non-overt (side and covert) Channels beyond the Challenge page (#18)
endojs/hardenedjs.org: public/challenge/other-non-overt-channels.md

# Non-overt (side and covert) Channels beyond the Challenge page
Dynamic and static sources of non-determinism in JavaScript

See "A Taxonomy of Security Issues" section [Overt, Side, and Covert Channels
](https://papers.agoric.com/taxonomy-of-security-issues/#overt-side-and-covert-channels)

## Measuring Duration

This [challenge page](https://hardenedjs.org/challenge) tests only timing-based side channels. A good challenge page for covert channels would enable the attacker to write attack code on both sides of the boundary. This would also extend the challenge to non-timing covert channels. We are aware of few non-timing-based non-overt channels in JavaScript itself. As far as we know, the following is an exhaustive list.

## Already blocked by `lockdown()`

> - `Data.now()`, no-argument calls to the `Date` constructor, `Math.random()`, mutable static properties of the `RegExp` constructor. Starting with Google-Caja in the 2000s, these have been locked down. We're confident these are not non-overt channels in Hardened JS and in the ses-shim and XS implementations of Hardened JS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Date.now()`, no-argument calls to the `Date` constructor, `Math.random()`, mutable static properties of the `RegExp` constructor. Starting with Google-Caja in the 2000s, these have been locked down. We're confident these are not non-overt channels in Hardened JS and in the ses-shim and XS implementations of Hardened JS.
```

> - Error stacks. On platforms conforming to [the Error Stacks proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-error-stacks) like XS and Firefox/Spidermonkey, the ses-shim will hide error stacks by default to code running in compartments. However, Safari/JSC gives unconditional access to the error stacks which the ses-shim cannot practically fix. Until recently, we were able to secure errors on Chromium/Node/v8, including the hiding of error stacks. Recently v8 made errors insecurable by placing the stack accessors on error instances, creating a subtle leak the ses-shim cannot fix. However, Google intends to try to conform to [the Error Stacks proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-error-stacks). Aside from XS, SpiderMonkey, JSC, and v8, we do not know how other platforms treat error stacks.

Reviewer: Capitalizing "V8" (https://github.com/v8/v8 ):
```suggestion
- Error stacks. On platforms conforming to [the Error Stacks proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-error-stacks) like XS and Firefox/Spidermonkey, the ses-shim will hide error stacks by default to code running in compartments. However, Safari/JSC gives unconditional access to the error stacks which the ses-shim cannot practically fix. Until recently, we were able to secure errors on Chromium/Node/V8, including the hiding of error stacks. Recently V8 made errors insecurable by placing the stack accessors on error instances, creating a subtle leak the ses-shim cannot fix. However, Google intends to try to conform to [the Error Stacks proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-error-stacks). Aside from XS, SpiderMonkey, JSC, and V8, we do not know how other platforms treat error stacks.
```

> - Node's async_hooks adding unspecified own properties to promises. This happens only when debugging. `lockdown()` already prevents this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Node's [async_hooks](https://nodejs.org/api/async_hooks.html) adding unspecified own properties to promises. This happens only when debugging. `lockdown()` already prevents this.
```

## Host objects

> The JavaScript spec by definition does not specify the behavior of host objects; that is up to each host platform. However, they are initially accessible only from properties of the realm's `globalThis` object, i.e., from the global object of the implicit start compartment. The JS spec also states that they must obey the same JS object invariants as everything else, with the explicit exception of `document.all`. For Hardened JS, all I/O or ability to effect the outside world originates only with such host objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JavaScript spec by definition does not specify the behavior of host objects; that is up to each host platform. However, they are initially accessible only from properties of the realm's `globalThis` object, i.e., from the global object of the implicit start compartment. The JS spec also states that they must obey the same JS object invariants as everything else, with the explicit exception of [`document.all`](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#sec-additional-ecmascript-features-for-web-browsers). For Hardened JS, all I/O or ability to interact with the outside world originates only with such host objects.
```

## Host hooks

The JavaScript spec also makes host-determined behavior observable by [host hooks](https://tc39.es/ecma262/multipage/host-layering-points.html#sec-host-layering-points). Most host hooks do not reveal host behavior that varies at runtime. In other words, most host hooks de-facto leak only static non-determinism enabling fingerprinting, as covered below. However, TODO we still need to exhaustively examine all host hooks to understand what they might leak.

Our long term goal for Hardened JS is to extend Compartments to enable most host hooks to be virtualized, so code on any host can emulate any other host to code running within a compartment. However, it is unclear whether we can overcome the headwinds in tc39 against such virtualizability.

> ## The NaN-bit leakage channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The NaN-bit leakage channel
```

> The JavaScript language can leak the bit encoding of a NaN via shared TypedArray views of an common ArrayBuffer. Although the JavaScript language has only one NaN value, the underlying IEEE 754 double-precision floating-point representation has many different bit patterns that represent NaN. This can be exploited as a side-channel to leak information. This actually happens on some platforms such as v8.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JavaScript language can leak the bit encoding of a `NaN` via Data view and shared TypedArray views of a common ArrayBuffer. Although the JavaScript language has only one NaN value, it corresponds to many different bit patterns of the underlying IEEE 754 double-precision floating-point representation. This can be exploited as a side-channel to leak information. This actually happens on some platforms such as V8.
```

> @ChALkeR explains at https://github.com/tc39/ecma262/pull/758#issuecomment-3919093669 that the behavior of this side-channel on v8. At https://junk.rray.org/poc/nani.html he demonstrates it, and it indeed even worse than I expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@ChALkeR explains at https://github.com/tc39/ecma262/pull/758#issuecomment-3919093669 the behavior of this side-channel on V8. At https://junk.rray.org/poc/nani.html he demonstrates it, and it is indeed even worse than expected.
```

This could be both a side channel or a covert channel. It is conceivable that even the existing challenge could be met using the NaN-bit side channel. See [fix(ses): plug implicit NaN side-channel
PR #3153](https://github.com/endojs/endo/pull/3153) for our attempt to plug this non-overt channel. This PR is already merged and is expected to appear soon in an endo release. It fixes `DataView.prototype.setFloat*` methods to canonicalize NaNs, and it denies implicit access to the typed `Float*Array` constructors.

> ## Leakage through observable GC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Leakage through observable GC
```

`WeakRef` and `FinalizationRegistry` enable observations of platform GC decisions. From the beginning, we have denied implicit access to these constructors for this reason. For the same reason, we proposed these so they could be cleanly deniable or virtualizable. We even ensured that the `WeakRef.prototype.constructor` link was optional, so a conforming implementation could omit it. If omitted, then a `WeakRef` instance – allowing the observation of the GC of one object – would not implicitly grant the ability to observe the GC of everything else. We initially proposed that cross-realm WeakRefs act strong, which we lost on implementation concerns. But we effectively get that back when cross-realm is membrane-based [cross-shadow-realm](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-shadowrealm).

> ## The Anthropic channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The Anthropic channel
```

The ses-shim can do nothing robust to ensure that memory exhaustion results in an immediate panic across platforms. But the Hardened JavaScript standard will require that and XS already implements that. Hardened JS gives up on trying to plug the remaining anthropic channel. This is worse than it sounds because in a world of communicating agents, other agents can make a decision on whether a given agent died. Panic is only anthropic within an agent.

## Static non-determinism

> The JavaScript spec leaves many other observable issues not-spec-determined and therefore up to implementation. For example, the prose content of error messages of platform-thrown errors. We agree with this position because we want implementations to be able to improve such prose with minimal friction. The spec does not currently specify that this is only static non-determinism, i.e., that it does not change at runtime within the running of a single program. But de-facto, it is in fact only static, and therefore does not enable the normal kind of non-overt channel. But the prose of error messages are still a non-overt channel that leaks bits that threaten a different security concern: Static non determism enables fingerprinting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JavaScript spec leaves many other observable details not-spec-determined and therefore up to implementation. For example, the prose content of error messages of platform-thrown errors. We agree with this position because we want implementations to be able to improve such prose with minimal friction. The spec does not currently specify that this is only static non-determinism, i.e., that it does not change at runtime within the running of a single program. But de-facto, it is in fact only static, and therefore does not enable the normal kind of non-overt channel. But the prose of error messages are still a non-overt channel that leaks bits that threaten a different security concern: Static non-determinism enables fingerprinting.
```

Some other de-facto-static potential platform differences

> - Locale and time-zone differences can technically vary and runtime. But JS code cannot cause them to vary, and they vary so slowly as to effectively be static channels. In any case, Hardened JS and its ses-shim does replace all the standard `toLocaleString` methods with aliases to the corresponding `toString`. But time-zone into can still leak.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Locale and time-zone differences can technically vary at runtime. But JS code cannot cause them to vary, and they vary so slowly as to effectively be static channels. In any case, Hardened JS and its ses-shim does replace all the standard `toLocaleString` methods with aliases to the corresponding `toString`. But time-zone info can still leak.
```

> - `for-in` order when the object (and its inheritance chain) being enumerated change during enumeration. tc39 has made progress pinning this down, but AFAIK it remains non-determisitic in the spec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `for-in` order when the object (and/or its inheritance chain) being enumerated change during enumeration. tc39 has made progress pinning this down, but AFAIK it remains non-deterministic in the spec.
```

> - What sort algorithm `Array.sort` uses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The default sort algorithm used by `Array.sort`.
```
